Update MASTG-KNOW-0036 and implement MASTG-TEST-0287 (#3706)
OWASP/mastg: tests-beta/android/MASVS-STORAGE/MASTG-TEST-0287.md

> title: Sensitive Data Stored Unencrypted via the SharedPreferences API to the App Sandbox

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Sensitive Data Stored Unencrypted via SharedPreferences in the App Sandbox
```

platform: android
id: MASTG-TEST-0287

> type: [dynamic]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type: [static, dynamic, filesystem]
```

weakness: MASWE-0006
best-practices: [MASTG-BEST-0x31]
profiles: [L1, L2]
prerequisites:
- identify-sensitive-data
knowledge: [MASTG-KNOW-0036]
---

## Overview

> When apps use the `SharedPreferences` API to store sensitive data without encryption, the data is written to plain-text XML files in the app's sandbox at `/data/data/<package-name>/shared_prefs/`. While `MODE_PRIVATE` restricts file access to the app itself, it doesn't protect the data from being read by attackers who gain access to the device's file system (for example, through device compromise, backup extraction, or physical access to rooted/unlocked devices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Android, applications can use the [`SharedPreferences`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/content/SharedPreferences) API to store sensitive data without encryption, typically under the app's private data directory, such as `/data/user/0/<package-name>/shared_prefs/` or `/data/data/<package-name>/shared_prefs/`.

While `MODE_PRIVATE` restricts file access to the app itself, it doesn't protect the data from being read by attackers who gain access to the device's file system (for example, through device compromise, backup extraction, or physical access to rooted/unlocked devices).
```

> This test uses runtime instrumentation to detect when the app writes data via `SharedPreferences` and determines whether sensitive data is being stored unencrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test uses runtime instrumentation to detect when the app writes data via `SharedPreferences` and determines whether sensitive data is being stored unencrypted.

For more information about the `SharedPreferences` API, refer to @MASTG-KNOW-0036.
```

## Steps

1. Install the app on a device (@MASTG-TECH-0005).

> 2. Make sure you have @MASTG-TOOL-0145 installed on your machine and the Frida server running on the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Removed as we don't reference tools anymore. Step 2 just uses method trace as technique.

> 3. Execute a method trace (@MASTG-TECH-0033) targeting the `SharedPreferences.Editor` methods that write data:

Author: Also hook `EncryptedSharedPreferences` to ensure it's not used.

Reviewer: Why would we want to hook to `EncryptedSharedPreferences` and ensure it's not used? If it's used, data is secured at rest, but we want to focus on the data that does not use such API and instead saves data in plain (`SharedPreferences`). Maybe I am losing some context here :)

> 3. Execute a method trace (@MASTG-TECH-0033) targeting the `SharedPreferences.Editor` methods that write data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Execute a method trace (@MASTG-TECH-0033) targeting the `SharedPreferences.Editor` methods that write data:
```

    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putString`

>     - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putStringSet`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Execute a method trace (@MASTG-TECH-0033) targeting the `SharedPreferences.Editor` methods that write data:
    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putString`
    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putStringSet`
    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putBoolean`
    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putFloat`
    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putInt`
    - `SharedPreferences.Editor.putLong`
```

> 4. Include tracing of cryptographic APIs to help determine if values are encrypted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Include tracing of cryptographic APIs to help determine if values are encrypted:
```

    - `javax.crypto.Cipher.*`
    - `java.security.KeyStore.*`
    - `javax.crypto.KeyGenerator.*`

>     - `android.util.Base64.*`

Reviewer: Base64 is not encryption and should not be used as a reference. Only encryption methods should be traced.

> 5. Exercise the app, navigating through various workflows and inputting data that may be considered sensitive.

Reviewer: Is "various workflows" the correct wording here? I would rather specify "all the workflows that involve sensitive data" or something similar to enforce that all sensitive data of the app is being analyzed.

> 5. Exercise the app, navigating through various workflows and inputting data that may be considered sensitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Exercise all workflows of the application that handle sensitive data.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 5. Retrieve the app's `SharedPreferences` XML files from the app's private data directory, typically under `shared_prefs/` (@MASTG-TECH-0008).
 6. Correlate each `SharedPreferences.Editor` write call with preceding cryptographic operations and with the values stored in the retrieved XML files.
 
```

## Observation

> The output should contain a list of all calls to `SharedPreferences` write methods, including the keys, values, and stack traces showing where in the app's code these calls originate. The trace should also include any related cryptographic operations that may indicate encryption is being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output should contain a list of all calls to `SharedPreferences` write methods, including the keys, values, and stack traces showing where in the app's code these calls originate. The trace should also include related cryptographic operations that may indicate encryption is being used.

The output should also contain the contents of the `SharedPreferences` XML file.
```

## Evaluation

The test case fails if sensitive data is written to `SharedPreferences` without being encrypted first.

> To evaluate the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A write should be considered unencrypted when a sensitive value is passed to a `SharedPreferences.Editor` write method and the same value, or a trivially reversible representation of it, appears in the retrieved XML file.

A write should not be considered a failure only because the sensitive value appears in the runtime trace. Runtime hooks can capture values before encryption, so findings from pattern matching must be correlated with the value passed to `SharedPreferences.Editor` and the value stored on disk.

If the trace is inconclusive, use the stack traces to inspect the relevant code paths in the reversed app (@MASTG-TECH-0017) and confirm whether encryption is applied before the value is written.
```

Reviewer: I have refactored the "Evaluation" section acording to other sections and what is being tested.

> 1. **High-level trace inspection**: Review the sequence of calls to identify if `SharedPreferences.Editor.putString` or `putStringSet` calls are preceded by `Cipher` operations. Values written without prior encryption are likely stored in cleartext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 2. **Pattern matching**: Use a secrets detection tool (for example, @MASTG-TOOL-0144) to scan the output for known secret patterns such as API keys, tokens, passwords, or private keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 3. **Manual verification**: Use the stack traces to navigate to the relevant code locations in the reversed app (@MASTG-TECH-0117) and trace back the source of the values being written to confirm whether they contain sensitive data and whether encryption is applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 4. **File system inspection**: Retrieve the `SharedPreferences` XML files from the app's sandbox using @MASTG-TOOL-0004 and inspect their contents to verify whether sensitive data is stored in cleartext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
